Yn y ffordd, mae gennym ni yn recordio.
Felly, roeddwn i'n cymryd fy hun yn Paul Hunt a'n gweithio ar Mencap Cymru.
Mae ym mhen i'r 21 o octobr 2020 a'i gael ymlaen 12.30 yn y blynyddoedd.
A allwch chi ddynnu'r ffordd?
I'm Helen. Marni, I work for Mencap as well and I work for Mencap.
My name is Richard Goodfellow and I volunteer at a charity shop in Aberdeck called Barnardo's but it's currently closed at the moment due to the pandemic.
And what's your connection with each other?
We are fiancees.
I know we will have covered this in the previous interview but could you just remind people who might be listening to this how long you've been engaged and how long you've been together?
We've been together about four years now in February and we got engaged last year.
You're on next Wednesday?
Yes.
So how have you both found the last seven months?
The first couple of months we didn't ever see each other, did we Richard?
No we didn't.
We were able to keep in contact through Skype and video calling and things and phone of course.
So why didn't you, was it just the lockdown?
It was, we were locked down, I think we were confused what we could see and don't think we were allowed to see outside.
Yes.
A little tickler time.
But then when it got a bit easier we were going out for walks.
Yes.
Every day.
A source of this to meet us.
Yep.
Then when we were there we were able to go and stay in your house when we went.
Yes, when the bubble started.
So you bubbled with each other did you?
Yes.
And how did you find that after a few months away from each other, what was it like seeing each other in person for the first time?
Relief.
Yes, it was pure joy.
Joy.
And what did you miss about being apart when you couldn't see each other?
What?
It was the company really wasn't it?
Yes, I think company mostly.
Yes.
Attempting not to kill each other but if you know what I mean Paul.
I know what you mean, I'm married.
Watching the same programmes, laughing at things, I think we mostly missed as well.
Yes.
So.
And talking to each other.
Yep.
Forgive me if you don't want to answer this but when you stayed at each others homes did you stay in the same bedroom, in the same bed?
Yes, didn't we Ed?
Yes.
Was there any aspect of that that you missed in the months that you weren't together?
No.
When I say no it's the snoring part of it Paul.
You're a snorer Richard.
Yes, unfortunately.
Rather than that I did miss it about the snoring.
We did miss each other apart from the snoring part.
And you say companionship, is it different do you think than just talking to each other over the internet?
Yes, definitely.
Can you tell me in what way it's different for you?
It's like when you can see someone on screen you can't always, how can I put this, it's the physicality of not having somebody near to you or next to you.
I agree with that.
Yeah.
Where do you both live at the moment?
At the moment we're apart.
I live on my own.
And I live with my parents.
Richard, do you live on your own completely or do you have any support coming in?
I do have support but not from my parents. My father missed them, I live across the road from me to the few doors up.
So they're there if I ever need them and they've been absolutely fantastic.
So when the first lockdown happened in March Richard, did you stay on your own?
I did, yeah, we were talking on the doorsteps and short distances.
And how did you find that apart from obviously missing Helen, how did you find just being on your own for that amount of time?
Up and down.
Sometimes I felt OK most of the time because I knew they were only a phone call away order, I could talk on the doorstep to them.
But when things got easier then we were able to meet outside, I was able to go and see them in the garden.
And that was OK and that was good.
Was there anything you enjoyed about not being able to go anywhere or do anything?
That's a tricky one.
I can't answer that I'm afraid Paul.
Well that's fine and Helen you live with your parents?
Yeah.
How did you find being around them?
I didn't mind because I felt it brought us a bit closer because sometimes I don't see them all the time.
That's wrong because I just stay with them once a week before lockdown.
But it seemed to have brought us closer because I've seen them all day now.
When I even worked at home I wasn't living with them.
So if I was stuck on bits of work, they were always there.
Mam can you let me with this or Dad?
But I don't know what I would cope with if I was living on my own mind.
It would probably be a bit different.
I suppose if I was all living on my own I would have to move back in because I don't think I would cope living on my own like Richard.
Did you ever both consider moving in with each other for the lockdown?
No.
Because not long beginning to lockdown my father went back into hospital so I thought it wasn't a risk.
You know that he wasn't as, I suppose it was serious but he didn't have a heart attack.
It was his heart that was at.
But if I wanted to go and see him it was really high risk of the Covid going back to him when he came out of hospital.
So it was that way of dodgy.
Yeah and he was risky so we wouldn't take the risk.
No that's fair enough.
So on top of everything else, Helen you had your father being a bit under the weather.
Yeah.
So how did you find all of that?
So you didn't visit him in hospital or anything?
No I couldn't. My mother and my sister took him in.
Luckily we got good doctors, really good doctors.
And he went to an appointment on a Monday, he was in on a Tuesday.
And they took him over, I wasn't with them, but they took him through the door and they weren't allowed to go through the hospital.
They were only allowed to go into a certain type of ward I think.
And left him there for about two weeks.
And we were only watching what we were doing now on Skype or FaceTime etc.
And that's what we did every day.
But a totally odd and totally easy way of visiting.
Did you find that? How did you find that emotionally having your father in for two weeks and not being able to see him?
Hard.
Especially now, I say now I've grown up.
I've never really left him in hospital.
Since he was 71, so since he's 70 he's bad.
It's a hard problem.
And the only time I've left him for longer is when he had a two day pass.
I didn't see him.
I was told by my father, do not come and see me, it won't be well.
But as long as seeing him not being with me in the house was already emotionally difficult.
Because when he was in having his pacemaker removed and the right witred, when I left him I got in the lift and cried.
Yes you did.
Because I'd never have left him in hospital.
And did Richard, you and Helen talk about that when it was happening?
Yes, we did, we spoke a lot didn't we?
Yes.
And with friends as well.
We liked friends.
Sometimes they've had a difficult moment and they would support me.
Yes.
Which is good actually.
So thinking about your friends, have you managed to stay in touch with them?
Yes, very much.
Mostly every day.
Either text or the semen for example, we are doing the Skype.
Yes.
And then we'd say two or three months in a bit and we'd start doing quizzes.
Yes we did, we started doing quizzes now and it's been really enjoyable.
It keeps your brain in gear.
Which I do the quizzes really, I don't take part, I just do the quiz.
Helen's quiz master.
And then we met through lockdown now with another friend called Richard.
Which we did, well you've met him before haven't you Rich?
Yes, but you haven't actually met him in the fresh sort have you?
No, but at the moment to me that's his meeting.
We met new friend called David through Richard and other friend.
So we've had a bigger group meeting, Skype-ing which is very good fun.
So that thing you've got tonight, who are those friends?
Where did you meet them? Obviously before lockdown I presume.
Well one is very much before lockdown.
Kerry our friend we've met in primary school.
And even though it isn't particularly a miniature story really,
that we'd had a huge gap of not meeting Kerry because he had moved on to a different school
and I was in primary and I went on to a different school in the camp.
So it was about the same time, how many years was that Rich?
I think about the same time as we were, about 12, 13 years gap not meeting each other.
Even though we didn't get to meet each other in the street at the time,
it wasn't like this.
I met Alby through Richard.
And they were the same.
But Kerry was from primary school.
Yep.
And so what kind of things did you do with them before lockdown?
We used to go out didn't we?
We had plans to go and see the Mrs Brown's boys in June.
Yeah.
But that's gone.
Yeah that was pushed back to next year.
Hopefully, fingers crossed.
Yes, let's hope so.
We're big fans of it.
And this new friend David, where did you meet him?
He was through Alby wasn't he Rich?
Yeah I met him through Alby a few years back.
We lost touch for a while but then he started joining us on Skype for chats and we've got friendly again.
Where's he from?
Penderyn.
Okay, so still near you.
Yeah.
I'm thinking, are you members of any groups at all before all of this?
I was in a choir called Martinash Coal Society.
And has that choir continued to meet online?
No.
It's about 90 odd of us.
I doubt we will be on a choir and get on the Skype.
But when we had a conference last week, there were 400-500 people on it.
So we suppose we could.
But most of them are not very much technically minded I suppose.
You've had emails from the chairwoman, asking how everybody was and all that.
Yeah.
Is there anyone from choir that you miss seeing regularly?
I'm awesome. We all have a very good friendship with all of them.
And one of the choir members was my school teacher in Llanwell.
So we're really making great friends now.
We miss him a lot.
I think we're missing all, we call it a family I suppose.
It's like choir family.
Yeah, we just miss genuinely socialising with them during the choir and then after the choir.
We miss the social part of it.
Not so much the singing then?
Yeah, we do miss that as well.
We miss singing, yeah.
But we like to drink a pot after it.
Finally.
You need a good drink after a good singing.
It oils the cords, you know, if you know what I mean.
It keeps your voice in good nick.
Do you know, are they just going to say next year?
I think as well, removing premises, well I guess, as a worker.
But I wouldn't gather removing premises to guarantee if we go social distance.
But not as to not yet saying the answer anyway.
At the moment.
Are there any other groups that you're part of like separate from each other?
Yeah, I joined, I think it was two years ago, a Nithynata group.
Which is actually when I look at it I'm the youngest.
Which is lovely.
But we haven't still gone back.
Because we are doing it in the new library.
I think they call it Community Hub.
Or what do they call it now?
And they all, it was nice when you put them in, elderly then.
They were all over the, I suppose, eighties, nineties, I think some of them.
So it's all like age limited stuff I think.
And I think about it, with the groups I think we're in.
So there's not a lot of experience with the other members of using Skype or Teams or?
Sometimes they do Facebook but we don't do Skype or anything.
As I said, they know very much I suppose, technically, I think of Skype and more.
And through Facebook.
And Richard, are there any groups that you go on your own to without Helen?
No, there isn't actually.
No.
So thinking about the last seven months, how has it affected your wellbeing, your mood and how you feel about things?
Sometimes when you've been on your own quite a bit.
I've got my parents across the road if I need them.
But sometimes when you just feel down in the dumps sometimes.
Everything we take for granted these days, don't we?
So things, you know, being able to go out whenever you feel like it, see anybody you wish to see.
And I know it's all been taken away.
It makes you appreciate life in a more way, you know.
And it really is how much you take for granted these days.
Because especially I feel a bit down in the dumps when we get to see friends on Skype.
Because normally, say, on a Saturday, how it means, what we do on a Saturday is actually meeting up with our friend Albie.
In his house.
And I tend to go and get our friend Kerry.
Because he lives, I think, supposedly down by you, Paul, in the sub-oath.
So I go down and pick him up.
Come up to as far as Richard, so Richard gets on the bus to go out, don't we?
So I do miss that bit, just picking him up and having our own chat.
With Kerry.
I know it sounds bad to say, well, Richard being there.
But he keeps saying to me, I'm like his sister, and he's like my brother, and we miss all that connection.
Really, it makes me, I don't know, appreciate things now.
If I didn't do it before, I'd just be on.
Because I should have missed the things.
We're supposed to take for granted, really.
Yeah.
So when things return to as normal as they can be, do you think you'll have changed?
You have changed your life.
Yeah.
Is there anything you're looking forward to that you haven't been able to do since March that you can't wait to do again?
Yes.
Oh, I'm so sorry.
We've got a few shows planned hopefully next year, if they will go ahead.
Which one are you looking forward to the most?
That's a tricky question.
Two I'm really looking forward to, of all.
Sleen Dioan yn April.
Yeah.
And lucky enough, in June I think, isn't it?
Yes.
That I bought tickets for me and Richard to go see The Queen with Adam Lambert.
And where will that be?
Both of them in Birmingham.
Hopefully everything will look okay between.
Yeah, let's hope so.
Otherwise here we'll have to move it around again I suppose.
And we've got, hmm?
Sorry, go on.
And we've got a rolling keeping in January if that goes ahead, but I'm not sure that will definitely go ahead yet.
You're going to Birmingham, how will you get there?
Train.
You'll just go together, is it?
Yeah.
And then will you come back the same day or will you stay overnight?
We'll stay overnight.
Stay overnight.
For both of them.
You've done that before, has it?
Yeah.
Yeah, we've done that before, yeah.
We've done, well this year actually, before actual lockdown, a week before we went up to Craffs, didn't we, right?
Yeah, we did.
With my mother actually.
Yeah, sorry to interrupt that.
We were just lucky I suppose to get back in time for lockdown to go in.
And just before lockdown as well, we went to see a megaball in Afibau in Cardiff.
Oh yeah.
Yeah, and that was really good too.
Were you aware of what was going on when you went to see him then?
Yes.
We were aware that the coronavirus was around and there was hand sanitizer everywhere during the Craffs, so you could always keep your hands clean and all that.
Yeah.
You mentioned going to Birmingham with your parents.
Have your parents both supported you to keep in touch with each other and, you know, have you just seen all the struggling and things like that?
Yeah, because the first thing most people say is, how's it going?
How's me?
It's always been, how's Richard? Is Richard coping?
So I don't know whether if he wasn't coping or what they would do about it, but it was, how is he coping? Is he doing well?
Yes, yes, okay, mam, yeah, he's doing fine.
Yeah, and there was always, and her parents.
And friends.
And friends, yeah.
Because when we started working, I would go out for me and my mother and if I see someone they say, well, how's Richard?
And I feel like they were worried about me then, because there was nothing to do with me, it was always Richard.
Richard, when you bubbled, did you ever go to Helen's house?
No, I didn't actually. Helen always came to me.
Why did you do that, do you think?
It was because you're at your own place, I suppose.
Yeah.
If it wasn't for a reason, I would have come over, because you always, you saw, I'll come over and I think, don't worry, I'll go on my own, home on my own.
But I always went to Richard's and I.
Yeah.
I suppose at Richard's, you know, obviously you've got some privacy there, you're not, there's no one else.
Thinking about, like, the restrictions that have been in place, obviously for a while now, have you both, do you remember the first time you went to a shop after lockdown?
I was at a shop after lockdown.
I was at a shop after lockdown, so I wear a mask.
Yeah.
Yeah, how did you find being in that environment now with all those new rules?
I didn't mind it as long as other people did it.
Yeah, because sometimes when you go to tests, of course, people are getting quite close to you when you're going through the aisles and they felt quite, you know, weird and it made you feel a bit apprehensive.
Yeah.
So.
Have you both, have you gone to, like, restaurants or pubs with the new rules and shops or have you just.
We've been to a few restaurants, like Pepper's in Aberdeen.
Yeah, we did go there a couple of times, didn't we?
Yeah, twice.
But they always did a track and trace, which I felt was safe.
Yeah, hand sanitiser when you go in.
Yeah.
They made sure, you know, as you hand sanitiser, use it, take it to the table.
How did you feel before you went? Was it, like, were you nervous or were you okay about it?
I was okay about it.
I was a bit apprehensive, but I had to go on a bus and all that.
It was the first time in a long time I'd been on a bus, so I was a bit nervous.
But I was a water mask, and I started getting better and then the cases started going up again, so.
Are you both concerned about catching the virus?
I don't.
I suppose, yes.
Yeah, yes.
And so, you mentioned face masks, and obviously you have to wear one going fast.
How do you feel about face masks now and to wear them?
I don't like them, but they do when they drop, so you've got to.
I don't mind wearing it, but the only problem is it steams my glasses up and I can't see through them.
Because, you know, on a Saturday with my father now, I go to church and we've got to wear them for a whole mass.
So that doesn't work.
First time we did it, oh, I did it, I was driving me nuts, and I couldn't wait to get out to take it off.
But what I do on my own is my sister who uses it for a whole time she's in work.
She's been eight hours wearing masks, so I don't mind that because it only takes half an hour wearing them as it drives me nuts.
And how do you feel seeing other people wearing a mask?
Because, you know, suppose some people may find it difficult to communicate with other people or read that person's facial expressions.
How do you feel talking to someone wearing a mask?
It's not too bad.
I don't mind.
I suppose this is the new normal from now on, so we have to get used to it.
We can normally understand them pretty well, so it's not too bad.
So obviously the Welsh Government have just announced that we're going to have another two-week fire break.
How did you feel when that was announced?
Well, we sort of knew it was coming.
I wasn't shocked.
I wasn't surprised.
I didn't feel you would go again, but I suppose it could be a lot worse in England, who's not doing very much really.
They've done a way to do a lot better than England, that's for sure.
Yeah.
So do you think you're going to see each other in person again before Christmas?
Yes, I suppose. Yeah.
Yes, yes.
Hold on to hope anyway, hold on, go for it.
Yeah.
What would you have done for Christmas if there were all these restrictions?
I suppose my house, normally on Christmas time we are grandparents down, and I don't think we are none down now.
And Richard, you would be there as well?
On Christmas day, no, because I'd be with my own family on Christmas day.
Normally before Christmas day and normally after Christmas day we'd see each other then, because normally we have my Gran down for Christmas, but unfortunately she lives in Exeter, so it doesn't matter if she's coming down this year.
No.
Well, at the moment.
You've been engaged for about a year, you said earlier?
Yeah.
Yes.
Has all of this changed any plans you may have to get married?
No.
No. We haven't really planned anything really.
We talked.
Yes.
But it was nothing, not anything set in stone.
No.
Is that something you're going to be thinking about in the future, do you think?
Yes.
Wait until the rules have changed so people can go to it, is it?
Yeah.
I suppose a lot more people can, I don't want it to be a small wedding, really.
No.
It doesn't mean to wait a long time, you'll have to wait a long time.
So do you think, having spent months apart from each other and then being able to see each other again, do you think moving to cards now?
Hopefully once.
In the future, yes, but at the moment with Richard being in Jobcentre, if I move in now, I think it will upset everything of his benefits,
Yeah, it would affect the benefits.
I am actively looking for work as best I can, but I'm his employee as well, so hopefully I'll get something soon when the lockdown eases and all that,
and then hopefully when I do get eventually into work, we'll talk about that and see what we can do.
So obviously now we're living under a lot of different rules at the moment.
Have you always understood them?
Some of them, yes, but…
Some of them we've understood, yeah, some of them we find a bit confusing and all that, but mostly we've understood them.
What rules have you found confusing?
Sometimes a bubbling part of it, like the one now that they said you can go one to one.
People who live on the rock and roll.
Yes, so yes, Richard, Helen, you are allowed to go and visit Richard still?
Yeah, until Friday I think, but I still say after, but because Richard is doing himself well,
even his father, that's for the bit, my mother was saying, no you can't do it.
Richard was saying to me, yes I can do it, so I was in between.
Oh yes, it was a bit confusing.
I have to go with my mother was saying, because I'm living with her.
I said, but your father not seeing his father.
And I kept saying, no, you see your father.
Yes, I'll be decided on that.
I understand now, of course, Richard you mentioned you're going to be seeing your parents.
I understand that you can meet, if you live on your own Richard, you can form a bubble with one of the households.
Obviously you've chosen to be a parent, right?
Yes.
Okay, so that makes sense then.
Yes, because I told him too, because after the year I've had my father, I said, you only got one father?
Yes.
Especially when I only lost nine, I feel it's better to keep this.
You never know what's around the corner, do you sir?
No.
Because as I said, I only lost my father, 20 yard, and he had sepsis as well, a year or over a year ago.
So I only lost him due to that.
So I said, seeing your father is more important than seeing me.
Do you think other people are following the rules?
Some that, yes, but I think mostly youngsters as well.
As I say, I've seen Richard, I walk home and the amount of youngsters are out.
As if it was no Covid.
And there's people out there trying their best to follow the rules, and there's people breaking them on purpose, and it makes you quite angry.
People aren't following the rules and all that, and people are trying to follow them as best they can.
I think that might be it.
Is there anything else that you think we should mention or talk about, or is there something that maybe you thought you were going to say but I interrupted you or something?
No.
No?
Well, thank you very much. I'm now going to stop the recording.
Thank you very much indeed, Paul.
Thank you.